[GENERAL INFORMATION 3](#general-information)

[Name of the Organization 3](#name-of-the-organization-mdm-france)

[Title of the Action 3](#title-of-the-action)

[Narrative Summary 3](#narrative-summary)

[Area of Intervention 3](#area-of-intervention)

[Dates and Duration
3](#dates-and-duration-1st-april-2019-to-31st-march-2020-12-calendar-months)

[HUMANITARIAN ORGANIZATION IN THE AREA
3](#humanitarian-organization-in-the-area)

[Presence in the area 3](#presence-in-the-area)

[Synergies with other actions 3](#synergies-with-other-actions)

[NEEDS ASSESSMENT AND BENEFICIARIES 3](#needs-assessment-and-beneficiaries)

[Needs and Risk Analysis 3](#needs-and-risk-analysis)

[Date of Assessment 3](#date-of-assessment)

[Assessment Methodology 3](#assessment-methodology)

[Problems, needs and risks analysis 3](#problems-needs-and-risks-analysis)

[Response analysis 3](#response-analysis)

[Previous evaluation or lessons learned exercise relevant for this action
3](#previous-evaluation-or-lessons-learned-exercise-relevant-for-this-action)

[Beneficiaries 3](#beneficiaries)

[Estimated total number of direct beneficiaries targeted by the action
3](#estimated-total-number-of-direct-beneficiaries-targeted-by-the-action)

[Estimated disaggregated data about direct beneficiaries
3](#estimated-disaggregated-data-about-direct-beneficiaries)

[Does the action specifically target certain groups or vulnerabilities?
3](#does-the-action-specifically-target-certain-groups-or-vulnerabilities)

[Beneficiaries, what are the selection criteria
4](#beneficiaries-what-are-the-selection-criteria)

[Beneficiaries, what is the involvement of beneficiaries in the action?
4](#beneficiaries-what-is-the-involvement-of-beneficiaries-in-the-action)

[Beneficiaries, more details on beneficiaries
4](#beneficiaries-more-details-on-beneficiaries)

[LOGIC OF INTERVENTION 4](#logic-of-intervention)

[Principal Objective 4](#principal-objective)

[Specific Objective 4](#specific-objective)

[Results 4](#results)

[GAZA 4](#gaza)

[WEST BANK 8](#west-bank)

[Preconditions 8](#preconditions)

[Assumptions and Risks 9](#assumptions-and-risks)

[Contingency Measures 9](#contingency-measures)

[Additional information on the operational context of the action
9](#additional-information-on-the-operational-context-of-the-action)

[QUALITY MARKERS 9](#quality-markers)

[Gender & Age 9](#gender-age)

[Resilience 9](#resilience)

[IMPLEMENTATION 9](#implementation)

[Human Resources and Management Capacities
9](#human-resources-and-management-capacities)

[Do you intend to deploy EU Aid Volunteers in the framework of the action?
9](#do-you-intend-to-deploy-eu-aid-volunteers-in-the-framework-of-the-action)

[Equipment and Goods 9](#equipment-and-goods)

[Use of Humanitarian Procurement Centers?
9](#use-of-humanitarian-procurement-centers)

[Work Plan 9](#work-plan)

[Specific Security Constrains 9](#specific-security-constrains)

[Are there any implementing partners? 9](#are-there-any-implementing-partners)

[Added value 9](#added-value)

[Coordination, supervision and controls
9](#coordination-supervision-and-controls)

[COORDINATION 9](#coordination)

[Operational coordination with other humanitarian actors
9](#operational-coordination-with-other-humanitarian-actors)

[Action listed 9](#action-listed)

[Coordination with national and local authorities
9](#coordination-with-national-and-local-authorities)

[Coordination with development actors and programmes
10](#coordination-with-development-actors-and-programmes)

[MONITORING AND EVALUATION 10](#monitoring-and-evaluation)

[VISIBILITY, COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION
10](#visibility-communication-and-information)

[FINANCIAL OVERVIEW OF THE ACTION 10](#financial-overview-of-the-action)

[LOGFRAME 10](#logframe)

[DEROGATIONS 10](#derogations)

[ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION 10](#administrative-information)

[CONCLUSIONS AND COMMENTS 10](#conclusions-and-comments)

[Acronyms 10](#acronyms)

GENERAL INFORMATION
===================

Name of the Organization: MDM France
------------------------------------

Title of the Action: 
---------------------

Narrative Summary: 
-------------------

Area of Intervention
--------------------

Dates and Duration: 1st April 2019 to 31st March 2020 – 12 calendar months
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

HUMANITARIAN ORGANIZATION IN THE AREA
=====================================

Presence in the area
--------------------

Synergies with other actions 
-----------------------------

NEEDS ASSESSMENT AND BENEFICIARIES
==================================

Needs and Risk Analysis
-----------------------

### Date of Assessment: 

### Assessment Methodology

### Problems, needs and risks analysis

The oPt is categorized as a country belonging to lower middle-income group.
Within this group, according to Health Profile 2015 Palestine[^1] and Health
Annual Report Palestine 2016[^2] when compared with data[^3] from both other
lower middle-income countries and other countries in the region (MENA excluding
high income), demographic and health indicators show a young population (Mean
Age is 20 for oPt, 21.2 for West Bank and 18.4 for Gaza) for a total in 2016 of
4,816,503 (West Bank: 2,935,368 – 519p/m2 ; Gaza: 1,881,135 – 5,154p/m2 ; Sex
Ratio M/F: 103.3) with a life expectancy situating it above the rest of
countries in both groups (73.7 years in general, 72.1 for males -72.4 WB 71.5 G-
and 75.2 for females -75.5 WB 74.6 G.)

[^1]: World Health Organization. Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean
Palestine health profile 2015 / World Health Organization. Regional Office for
the Eastern Mediterranean p. WHO-EM/HST/232/E

[^2]: Ministry of Health, PHIC, Health Status, Palestine, 2016, July 2017

[^3]: <http://databank.worldbank.org/data/source/health-nutrition-and-population-statistics>.
Accessed December 2018.

The burden of NCD causes, depending sources, between 66,2% and 74,9% of all
deaths, what again situates oPt above the average of lower middle-income
countries and at same level that MENA (high income excluded) group. Among them,
only four most prevalent chronic diseases (cardiovascular disease, cancer,
stroke and diabetes) accounted for 64.5% of all reported deaths in 2016. This
reflect a health status which progressively has followed a clear trend from
reduction and control of infectious diseases as main causes of mortality and
morbidity to a rise of NCD associated to changes in lifestyle and unhealthy
habits.

Primary Health Care is the core of Palestinian Health System with 739 centers,
of which 587 are in West Bank and 132 in Gaza Strip. 63.1% are belonging to
Palestinian MoH. The population rate per PHCC, varies between 2,811 in South
Hebron to 15,737 in Gaza City, with a total mean of 6,159 people per PHCC, 4,549
in West Bank and 12,376 in Gaza Strip.

Based on MdM’s two previous assessments focused on PHCC in Gaza Strip and due to
the very high population density, the catchment population ranges from 726 to
134,669 persons with mean 25,396 and median 26,177. The average number of total
consultations per months is very different from one clinic to another, from
around 1700 for the smallest PHCC to more than 13,000 for biggest. It is
interesting to highlight that the number of patients who attended ERs in PHCC
has experienced a significant increment from 2016 to 2017 being injuries and
trauma related problems together with tear gas inhalation the causes which
contributed with more than 40% of increment at Emergency Departments.

The fast brushstroke above on Health System in Gaza, gives an idea of a full
picture in which PHCC in Gaza Strip assume a huge part of medical cares provided
to a population for which NCD are the most prevalent causes of both mortality
and morbidity but also, when rapid onsets of crisis, they play a key role in
relieving the load of work of secondary level. Therefore, to be ready for being
able to play both roles ensuring business continuity and responding with timely
and properly medical surge capacity is crucial as part of a lifesaving strategy
and also the humanitarian right to health.

According to different emergency/crisis scenarios[^4], the most likely one is a
new war in Gaza strip. Based on the Gaza specific section of the inter-cluster
contingency plan (ICCP)[^5], and assuming lessons learned from the previous 2014
conflict, it’s estimated that till 600,000 persons could be forcibly displaced
from areas of military operations to main urban areas like Gaza and Khan Younis.
It is stated there as a priority need to ensure medical cares for all these
displaced populations together with lifesaving interventions to wounded and
critical patients. This also means an extra pressure upon host communities and
host services. Here is where capacity and capability of PHCC to deal with
medical surge can make a difference: ensuring the provision of routine primary
healthcare to both host and displaced communities (business continuity),
providing lifesaving interventions through the stabilization of critical
patients before referral to secondary level and reducing the load of work from
Hospitals in charge to deal with the burden of major injuries and trauma
emergencies.

[^4]: Médecins du Monde Emergency and Preparedness Plan for Palestine 2018

[^5]: OCHA, Inter-cluster Contingency Plan for Palestine July 2017

While UNRWA Designated Emergency Shelters (DES) have specific plans to provide
medical services to IDPs hosted there, the 32 governmental DES have not
considered medical provision inside centers, as PHCC should remain functional
and able to provide services in PHCC to displaced communities[^6]. However,
lessons learned from previous displacements and characteristics of such
communities, advise to have plans to ensure the provision of certain services in
DES through outreach activities by PHCC. PHCC, therefore, need to have specific
and detailed plans to deal with this medical surge and to adapt themselves to
specific needs and contingency methodologies[^7].

[^6]: MoH, Gaza, Contingency Plan

[^7]: Lessons learned from Gaza Shelter Response, September 2016

Furthermore, and consequently, the structural and operational design of
governmental DES has not considered the provision of medical services
inside[^8].

[^8]: Upgrading PA schools to serve as a Designated Emergency Shelters in the
Gaza Strip, December 2016

These general needs are even more relevant for most vulnerable groups who face
increased and new challenges like women and girls in higher risk of sexual and
gender-based violence during crisis, women in need of sexual and reproductive
services, children or Mental Health patients and other groups in need of chronic
treatment.

In WB, the occupation-related critical incidents have significant psychological
and psychosocial effects on the communities including emotional disturbances,
such as continuous feeling of frustration, extreme fear, anger and panic
attacks; sleeping difficulties, concentration difficulties at school, regression
in academic process, anxiety and depression; and reactions which can lead to
psychosocial problems like domestic violence and social withdrawal.

The Mental Health strategy of the MoH 2015-2019 has identified the need to
ensure a focus on trauma and crisis interventions as one of the three top
strategic priority actions. This has also been highlighted in the Humanitarian
Needs Overview for 2019 and included in the 2019 Humanitarian Response Plan for
Palestine.

The results of a 2013 survey on common mental health disorders in the West Bank,
showed a prevalence rate of 26%, higher than the 10-15 percent of adult
populations affected by these disorders reported worldwide. Low economic status,
living in a rural community, being female and having more than one co-morbidity
were identified as factors associated with common mental disorder.

Based on MdM data from past and present interventions[^9], a quick analysis
yields a clear and concerning picture:

[^9]: Data available upon demand from MdM Monitool app

-   78% of the adult population who received Psychological First Aid reported
    severe signs of acute stress and are at risk of developing Post Traumatic
    Stress Disorders;

-   20% of the adult population reported moderate signs of acute stress;

-   Only 2% from our adult population report little or no signs of acute stress;

-   Both women and men are equally affected (even if we observe a
    non-significant slight difference between genders: 78% for women vs 71% for
    men);

-   54,4% of boys and 46,5% of girls under the age of 15 report severe signs of
    acute stress and suffer from emotional disturbances and behavioural
    disorders;

-   Regression in academic progress is identified among 30% children and
    teenagers.

In a context of an escalation of tensions and increasing occupation-related
critical events, the provision of MHPSS emergency interventions is crucial to
both minimize the acute impact and to strengthen the resilience of communities
and most vulnerable groups exposed to daily violence.

### Response analysis

MdM aims to complement currents efforts to develop a full EPREP in Gaza
strengthening the health component through the reinforcement of the preparedness
and response capacity of the Primary Health Care level and providing a
comprehensive integration of it within interrelated sectors and actors. Based on
needs and risk analysis, it will have a special focus on potential IDP and host
communities as the gap has been clearly identified. This is totally aligned with
HNC priorities and 2019 HNO and HRP as well as MoH analysis. The strategy of MdM
is always, when possible, to strengthen public available resources rather than
create parallel or substituting structures. MdM shares with MoH the vision that
reinforcing capability and capacity of PHCC is the best way to ensure provision
of quality medical interventions for IDPs both in DES and out of DES during
emergencies, at the same time to contributing to the sustainability of a more
robust public health system, maximizing the impact of the intervention.

Even when it’s assumed that EPREP is a continuous process and concrete actions
don’t guarantee success under different circumstances and after some time, the
production of solid reviewable documents and the capacitation in their
implementation, together with a clear plan of continuous learning and
maintenance by accountable responsibilities holders, may mitigate the impact of
disasters over general population living in the Gaza Strip and specific
vulnerable groups.

In light of the above, the response strategy for improving the EPREP in the Gaza
strip will be:

-   Deeper assessment of specific needs

-   Production of specific CP to address identified needs

-   Capacitation to carry out implementation of CP by service providers

-   Integration and coordination with other responses and initiatives

Regarding the provision of MHPSS emergency aid in WB as response to settler’s
and other type of violence, a key in organizing mental health and psychosocial
support is to develop a layered system of complementary supports that meets the
needs of different groups. Based on the international standards, the basic
services and safety are the first layer of MHPSS interventions in emergency
settings, meanwhile the MHPSS emergency interventions come as a second layer,
all these layers of intervention are important to ensure the resumption of the
wellbeing of the community and individuals which is interrupted following
critical/traumatic incidents. The wellbeing of direct and indirect victims
impacted by critical incidents should by protected through addressing the basic
protection and physical needs (safety, food, shelter, water, basic health
services and legal aid) but also as important the psychological and social
needs. MDM’s response is, overall, a complementary work to the work done by the
Protection Consortium actors: they provide the basic and protection services,
meanwhile MDM completes the intervention by providing the MHPSS emergency
responses.

For both responses, MdM always adopts mainstreaming of gender equity and
protection of vulnerable groups with specific and detailed protocols and
procedures.

### Previous evaluation or lessons learned exercise relevant for this action

Beneficiaries
-------------

### Estimated total number of direct beneficiaries targeted by the action

### Estimated disaggregated data about direct beneficiaries

### Does the action specifically target certain groups or vulnerabilities?

### Beneficiaries, what are the selection criteria

### Beneficiaries, what is the involvement of beneficiaries in the action?

### Beneficiaries, more details on beneficiaries

LOGIC OF INTERVENTION
=====================

Principal Objective
-------------------

To strengthen preparedness, response and resilience of most vulnerable people
living in oPt.

Specific Objective
------------------

#### Short Description

To support the most vulnerable populations living in oPt through the enhancement
of an Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan in Gaza Strip and the provision
of emergency psychosocial support to victims of conflict-related violence in
West Bank.

#### Detailed Description

#### Indicators

Results
-------

### GAZA

1.- Developed in 12 months the Health Component for 32 Governmental Designated
Emergency Shelters (DES) in Gaza Strip.

#### Estimated total number of direct beneficiaries targeted by the result

#### Beneficiary Type

#### Comments on Beneficiaries

#### Estimated Total Amount

#### Indicators

-   Every DES, together with capacity and services, has been located in a
    digital map accessible online and put in relation with closest Health
    Facilities.

-   Every DES has in its design a proper space to serve as
    Emergency/Consultation Room.

-   Every DES has a detailed list with estimated drugs, disposables and medical
    equipment needed for ensure quality medical services to population living in
    DES.

-   Plan for provision of medical services in DES is included in OCHA
    Contingency Plan (CP) and Ministry of Health CP.

#### Activities

-   Digital mapping of DES and closest Health Facilities, together with capacity
    and services.

-   Medical Need Assessment for each DES based in capacity and geographical
    risk.

-   Rehabilitation of a space within the design of each DES able to act as an
    Emergency/Consultation Room.

-   Establishment of coordination mechanisms with other clusters (shelter, WASH
    and protection)

-   Presentation of DES EPREP to key actors and stakeholders (MoH, WHO, OCHA,
    HNC)

2.- Developed CP for 15 PHCC in charge of ensuring lifesaving interventions and
medical services to IDPs in DES and out DES in the context of the EPREP in Gaza.

#### Estimated total number of direct beneficiaries targeted by the result

#### Beneficiary Type

#### Comments on Beneficiaries

#### Estimated Total Amount

#### Indicators

-   Every PHCC in charge of providing medical services in DES has a CP covering:

    -   In-DES medical services (conformation of mobile teams, roasters,
        prepositioned stock, security measures, evacuations to Hospitals...)

    -   Out-DES IDP medical services (medical surge)

    -   Specific protocols on: triage, SGBV, MHPSS, health education and
        promotion in crisis, IPC and basic EWS on epidemics.

    -   Coordination with other cluster' actors.

    -   Security and risks mitigation measures.

    -   Gender/Age/Inclusiveness approach.

-   PHCC CP are included in MoH CP

-   Agreement with MoH and PHCC is reached to update CP at least every two
    years.

-   Every PHCC has a prepositioned stock covering estimated needs to provide
    medical services in-DES for at least three months.

-   All PHCC have standard (MoH) tools for EWS on epidemics.

-   Drills conducted, and report produced after feedback workshop (PHCS, MoH,
    MoSA /OCHA, UNWRA, WHO as observers)

#### Activities

-   Workshop with representatives of MoH, PHD and directors of PHCC.

-   Workshop with PHCC heads of departments.

-   Production of CP for PHCC covering:

    -   In-DES medical services (conformation of mobile teams, roasters,
        prepositioned stock, security measures, evacuations to Hospitals...)

    -   Out-DES IDP medical services (medical surge)

    -   Specific protocols on: triage, SGBV, MHPSS, health education and
        promotion in crisis, IPC and basic EWS on epidemics.

    -   Coordination with other clusters' actors.

    -   Security and risk mitigation measures.

    -   Gender/Age/Inclusiveness approach.

-   Procurement and preposition of medical stock.

-   Production and/or review of specific tools for EWS on epidemics in crisis.

-   1 drill per year for every PHCC to test implementation of CP (simulation
    plus feedback workshop)

3.- Medical staff in charge of providing lifesaving attention and quality cares
to IDPs in-DES and out-DES, as part of EPREP in Gaza, trained and capacitated.

#### Estimated total number of direct beneficiaries targeted by the result

#### Beneficiary Type

#### Comments on Beneficiaries

#### Estimated Total Amount

#### Indicators

-   All medical doctors working in selected 15 PHCC have ACLS certification
    valid for two years.

-   All medical staff complete training modules on most prevalent diseases, PSS,
    SGBV and EWS on epidemics, pass final test and get certification.

-   All staff have participated in, at least, 1 drill per year on the CP
    implementation.

#### Activities

-   ACLS for doctors providing medical cares to IDPs.

-   Refreshment training in the management of more prevalent problems for most
    vulnerable groups:

    -   Pregnant Women

    -   Children under five

    -   NCD

    -   Elders

    -   Patients with mental disorders

    -   Persons with special needs

-   Training in MH Gap.

-   Training in EWS on epidemics and health information systems.

-   Training in identification and medical management of SGBV survivors.

-   1 drill per year for every PHCC to test implementation of CP (simulation
    plus feedback workshop) *[same activity than for result 2]*

4.- Strengthened community response capacity and resilience (both displaced and
host communities), within Gaza EPREP framework, to provide lifesaving aid and
PSS.

#### Estimated total number of direct beneficiaries targeted by the result

#### Beneficiary Type

#### Comments on Beneficiaries

#### Estimated Total Amount

#### Indicators

-   At least 300 CHFR chosen among both potential displaced and host communities
    trained.

-   Community epidemiological triggers developed, and tools produced.

-   All CHFR have participated, at least, in 1 drill per year.

-   50% of community members have been reached by IEC materials.

-   50% of community members express better perception of community protection,
    preparedness and capacity to respond to emergencies at the end of the
    intervention.

#### Activities

-   Election of community health first responders (CHFR) (among both potential
    displaced and host communities)

-   BLS-AED training for CHFR.

-   Psychological First Aid (PFA)and Psychoeducation training for CHFR.

-   Training on community epidemiological triggers monitoring for CHFR.

-   Capacitation on referral pathway between DES, PHCC and community.

-   Participation of CHFR in drills of PHCC within their area of responsibility.

-   Dissemination of EPREP key messages through IEC tools.

### WEST BANK

5.- Strengthened resilience for communities in WB (Ramallah Governorate and East
Jerusalem) living under occupation and affected by settlers' violence,
demolitions, forced displacement and abusive use of force by ISF.

#### Estimated total number of direct beneficiaries targeted by the result

#### Beneficiary Type

#### Comments on Beneficiaries

#### Estimated Total Amount

#### Indicators

-   At least 80% of people involved in critical events are assessed by first
    support visit.

-   At least 80% of people identified in need of PFA receive first aid within
    first 72 hours.

-   At least 80% of people in need of urgent specialized services are referred.

-   At least 80% of people in need of urgent protection services are referred
    within first 72 hours.

-   Follow-up through referral and counter-referral pathway and forms completed
    for at least 50% of cased referred to specialized MH services.

-   Follow-up through referral and counter-referral pathway and forms completed
    for at least 75% of cases referred to specialized MH services.

-   At least 70% of people who receive first aid support express satisfaction
    with services provided.

-   At least 70% of people who participate in psychoeducation sessions express
    better coping strategies and resilience mechanism for occupation-related
    critical incidents.

#### Activities

-   Provision of MHPSS support including emergency/first aid interventions to
    persons/communities affected by occupation-related critical events.

-   Identification, referral and follow-up of cases in need of urgent
    protection, in coordination with protection cluster.

-   Identification, treatment, referral and follow-up of cases in need of urgent
    specialized MH services.

-   Psychoeducation sessions for most vulnerable groups and communities.

6.- Improved the awareness of general public upon the impact of
occupation-related violence on the mental health of population living in West
Bank.

#### Estimated total number of direct beneficiaries targeted by the result

#### Beneficiary Type

#### Comments on Beneficiaries

#### Estimated Total Amount

#### Indicators

-   500 hardcopies of study results are distributed.

-   Study results are published online.

-   At least one presentation of the study, among key stakeholders, is done.

#### Activities

-   Conduct a study upon the impact on mental health caused by
    occupation-related violence in West Bank.

-   Produce, print and publish the results of the study.

-   Dissemination of results among key stakeholders.

Preconditions
-------------

Assumptions and Risks
---------------------

Contingency Measures
--------------------

Additional information on the operational context of the action
---------------------------------------------------------------

QUALITY MARKERS
===============

Gender & Age
------------

Resilience
----------

IMPLEMENTATION
==============

Human Resources and Management Capacities
-----------------------------------------

Do you intend to deploy EU Aid Volunteers in the framework of the action?
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

Equipment and Goods
-------------------

Use of Humanitarian Procurement Centers?
----------------------------------------

Work Plan
---------

Specific Security Constrains
----------------------------

Are there any implementing partners?
------------------------------------

Added value
-----------

Coordination, supervision and controls
--------------------------------------

COORDINATION
============

Operational coordination with other humanitarian actors
-------------------------------------------------------

Action listed
-------------

Coordination with national and local authorities
------------------------------------------------

Coordination with development actors and programmes
---------------------------------------------------

MONITORING AND EVALUATION
=========================

VISIBILITY, COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION
=========================================

FINANCIAL OVERVIEW OF THE ACTION
================================

LOGFRAME
========

DEROGATIONS
===========

ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION
==========================

CONCLUSIONS AND COMMENTS
========================

Acronyms
--------

ACLS Advanced Cardiac Life Support

BLS Basic Life Support

CHFR Community Health First Responder

CP Contingency Plan

DES Designated Emergency Shelter

ER Emergency Room

EWS Early Warning System

HNC Health & Nutrition Cluster

ICCP Inter-cluster Contingency Plan

IDP Internal Displaced Population/Persons

IPC Infection Prevention and Control

ISF Israel Security Forces

MENA Middle East & North Africa

MoH Ministry of Health

MoSA Ministry of Social Affairs

NCD Non-Communicable Disease

OCHA Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs

PFA Psychological First Aid

PHCC Primary Health Care Center

PHD Primary Health Directorate

PHTLS Pre-Hospital Trauma Life Support

SGBV Sexual Gender Based Violence

UNRWA United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees.
